\section{Related work}

There is significant work building Datalog engines for various
purposes: Souffle~\cite{scholz-cc16} (program analysis),
LogiQL~\cite{Borraz-Sanchez-dlp18} (integer linear programming),
Vadalog~\cite{Bellomarini-vldb18} (existential quantification),
DeALS~\cite{Yang-vldb17} (concurrent execution),
DataFun~\cite{Arntzenius-icfp16} (higher-order functional
programming), NDLog~\cite{loo-cacm09} (declarative networking),
SociaLite~\cite{Seo-vldb13} (large scale graph analysis),
and~\cite{Barany-tods17} (probabilistic programming).  A survey can be
found in~\cite{Maier-book18}.

Delete-Rederive~\cite{Gupta-sigmod93} presents an algorithm for
incremental view update.  Another incremental algorithm is presented
in~\cite{dong-dbpl94}.  Saha presents a more efficient incremental
evaluation strategy~\cite{saha-iclp03}.  DDlog is built on top of
Differential Dataflow~\cite{differential-dataflow}; several
declarative incremental query engines generalizing Datalog were built
on top of DD~\cite{timely-dataflow,differential-dataflow-paper}.

The only other incremental Datalog engine
that we are aware of is a LogiQL~\cite{Green-pods15}, a commercial
product of LogicBlox~\cite{Aref-sigmod15}.  IncA~\cite{IncA} is a
domain-specific language for incremental program analysis.

Some of the DDlog features were inspired by .Net
LINQ~\cite{meijer-dpcool03,Meijer-sigmod06}.

There is also significant work on incremental computation systems;
some of these are for much richer computation
models~\cite{acar-05,Carlsson-icfp02,Demetrescu-oopsla11,harkes-ecoop16,Hammer-pldi14},
and some just for relational
models:~\cite{ahmad-vldb12,Szabo-ase016,zhao-icmd17}.
